variable distance- parallel plate type, variable area- parallel plate, serrated plate/teeth type and cylindrical type, variable dielectric constant type: calculation of sensitivities; proximity measurement stretched diaphragm type: microphones, response characteristics introduction to mems-interfacing non-electronics world to electronics mechanical and electrical properties of mems materials integrated-circuits based microfabrication technology surface micromachining bulk micromachining process integration of mems with cmos electronics microstructural elements sensors capacitive pressure sensors piezoelectric devices chemical sensors actuators electrostatic actuators thermal actuators magnetic actuators mechanical resonators & filters mems for use in biomedical world micro-fluidic dynamics & drug delivery devices implantable ultrasound system mems dna analysis system microsurgical tools lab-on-a-chip interface circuits for mems microsystems 
fuzzy logic neural networks neuro-fuzzy systems genetic algorithms green computing computational data mining computational web intelligence biomedical informatics learning in nn the perceptron convergence theorem multi-layer perceptron training, testing, and validation data pre-processing, regression, universal approximation, classification, time-series prediction unsupervised learning: k-means, lvp, som evolutionary learning, genetic algorithms genetic algorithms, the fundamental theorem of genetic algorithms dimensionality reduction & feature selection dimensionality reduction: pca radial basis function network support vector machines (svm) libsvm swarm intelligence & ant colony optimization optimization and search, levenberg-marquardt, simulated annealing probability and learning: naive bayes,, em algorithm, k-nearest neighbor fuzzy systems hybrid intelligent systems, expert systems, neuro-fuzzy systems associative memories: hopfield nn & boltzmann machine 
control system modeling : basic elements of control system – open loop and closed loop systems – differential equation – transfer function, modeling of electric systems, translational and rotational mechanical systems – block diagram reduction techniques – signal flow graph. time response analysis : time response analysis – first order systems – impulse and step response analysis of second order systems – steady state errors – p, pi, pd and pid compensation, analysis using matlab frequency response analysis : frequency response – bode plot, polar plot, nyquist plot – frequency domain specifications from the plots – constant m and n circles – nichol’s chart – use of nichol’s chart in control system analysis. series, parallel, series-parallel compensators – lead, lag, and lead lag compensators, analysis using matlab. stability analysis : stability, routh-hurwitz criterion, root locus technique, construction of root locus, stability, dominant poles, application of root locus diagram – nyquist stability criterion – relative stability, analysis using matlab state variable analysis & digital control systems : state space representation of continuous time systems – state equations – transfer function  from  state  variable  representation  –  solutions  of  the  state  equations  – concepts of controllability and observability – state space representation  for discrete time systems. sampled data control systems – sampling theorem – sample & hold – open loop & closed loop sampled data systems. review of modeling and analysis of lti systems: modeling of physical systems. design specifications and performance indices, motion control systems, transportation lags. approximation of time-delay functions., sensitivity of control systems to parameter variations. effects of disturbance of signals. disturbance rejection. analysis in state-space: a perspective on state-space design. state variables. state models for physical systems. siso and mimo systems. solution of state equations. transfer function. eigenvalues and eigenvectors. jacobian linearization technique. state transformations and diagonalisation. transformation to phase-variable canonical form. controllability and observability. duality property. stability. introduction to discrete-time systems: basic elements of discrete-time control system. z-transform and properties. inverse z-transform. difference equation and its solution by z-transform method. z-transfer function. state diagram of digital systems. time delay. direct, cascade and parallel decomposition of z-transfer functions. feedback control design: continuous control design. proportional, derivative and integral control action. pid controller tuning rules. ziegler-nichols method. two degree of freedom control systems. compensator design using bode diagram in frequency response approach. lag, lead, lag-lead compensator. control law design for full state feedback by pole placement. full order observer system. observer based state feedback. separation principal. non linear system: classification and types of non-linearity. phenomena peculiar to non-linear systems. methods of analysis. linearization based on taylor’s series expansion. jacobian linearization. phase trajectory and its construction. phase-plane analysis of linear and non-linear sustems. existence of limit cycles. describing function of typical non-linearities. stability analysis by df method. introduction to didf. popov’s circle criterion. stability analysis by lyapunov’s indirect and direct methods, lypunov’s theorem 
modelling and simulation of dynamic systems state variable modelling of continuous dynamic systems. solution methods for nonlinear differential equations. bond graph techniques. simulation software. skeletal structure of simulation software. packages and scripting techniques. real-time simulation systems. case studies. qualitative modelling. control system engineering review of classical control theory: stability margins, correlation of frequency domain and time domain parameters, design specifications, compensation of continuous systems, actuator selection and design. state variable modelling of linear continuous systems, controllability and observability. concepts of linear sampled data systems: discrete equivalents of continuous data systems, reconstruction of sampled signals, sample and 0 order holds, stability of linear sampled data systems. state variable modelling of linear discrete data systems, controllability and observability. digital control theory structure of a computer controlled system. review of z-transform. computation of time response of discrete data system. bilinear transformation. w-plane, prewarping, inverse transformation. design of discrete controllers. z-domain compensation, w-plane compensation, state variable feed back, deadbeat controller sampled data version of pid controllers. effect of data digitization. effect of finite word size, limit cycle determination. rockets and missiles classification of rockets & missiles, components, subsystems and layout, launching techniques, variation of air density with altitude, indian standard atmosphere. motion of rockets – external ballistics and powered motion: equations of motion in point mass mode, static stability, motion about the cg, special case like exo-atmospheric, vertical ascent motion, tip-off, reentry. elementary missile guidance principles: 2 guidance schemes, command guidance, proportional navigation, inertial sensors and auxiliaries, concept of quaternion, strapped down inertial navigation. aerodynamics of subsonic and supersonic vehicles: drag coefficients, lift coefficients, wake and down wash effects, design consideration. the airframe – structural, functional and aerodynamic aspects: control schemes: aerodynamic, thrust vectoring, actuation systems. propulsion systems: general considerations, thrust-time characteristics, isp, solid propulsion systems (construction and subsystems, propellant types, composition and characteristics), liquid propulsion system (construction and subsystems, propellant types, composition and characteristics, cryogenic propulsion systems), ramjet concepts, nozzle design consideration. computer control of industrial processes introduction to computer control: brief history, advantages, different types and application areas, direct digital control and supervisory control, scada, embedded controller. example processes: standard siso process, first order with delay standard sensors and actuators. simple mimo process. batch process, which require sequential control. architecture of a computer control system: generic architecture. use of context diagram and dfd for architectural description. specific examples interfacing : digital data transfer from peripherals, polling, interrupt, dma. interfacing considerations for field input-output. programmable logic controllers: features functionalities and architecture, examples of programming and applications ddc controllers: features functionalities and architecture, examples. ddc algorithms. digital implementation of two term (pi, pd) and three term (pid) controller. implementation of digital compensators. model based control and their digital implementations. distributed control: architecture, advantages. communication for distributed control. field bus. optimal and robust control optimal control systems and performance indices. optimal control of linear systems with quadratic performance index. optimal state regulator design through matrix ricatti equation. properties and application of the optimal regulator. linear quadratic gaussian (lqg) control. state estimator design. system design using state estimators. loop transfer recovery (ltr). frequency shaping. robust control systems and system sensitivity. uncertainty and robustness. structured and unstructured uncertainty. internal stability. kharitnov's methodology. stability robustness and performance robustness of control systems. mu-synthesis. robust tracking. h2 and h-infinity control. h-infinity loop shaping. gap metric. linear matrix inequalities (lmi). quantitative feedback theory (qft). nonlinear and adaptive control nonlinear control state-space representation of non-linear systems, common nonlinearities and their origin, examples of phase plane analysis for relay based control, popov’s stability criterion, local linearization, jacobian and lyapunov’s first theorem, stability analysis by lyapunov theory, describing function method and limit cycle, feedback linearization, sliding mode control, concepts of observability for non-linear systems adaptive control linear parametric model, adaptive laws, model reference adaptive control, robustness in adaptive control, adaptive control of nonlinear systems, gain scheduling control real time systems overview of real time systems. definition, evolution, typology, structure and applications. temporal modelling and specification of real time systems. state diagram, finite automata model, petri-net, state chart and mode chart, q-model, formal methods. sequential and logic control. ladder diagram, plc programming, case studies in interlocking and sequence control. hardware components and configuration of real time system. interfacing systems for analog and digital i/o, programmable logic control system architecture, computer control system architecture, flight control systems, hardware-inloop simulation systems, distributed control architecture, reliability enhancement by redundancy. real time operating systems. features, primary components. structured design of real time systems. data flow oriented method of analysis and design. mode chart oriented methods. development, integration and validation of real time systems. special consideration for safety critical systems. control and guidance handling criteria of piloted aircraft. motion of a missile in 6 dof. euler angle and quaternion. six dof equation of motion, structure of 6 dof simulation. roll autopilot for missiles equation of motion, transfer function, objective and structure. lateral stabilisation of missiles. equation of motion, transfer functions, structure and design of lateral missile autopilots. pitch plane control of aircraft. objectives, structure of stability augmentation systems, pitch demand, q-demand, n-demand and alpha demand fcs control systems. lateral control of bank to turn vehicles. goals and structure of lateral fcs, coordinated turn, roll lateral coupling, cross feed. command guidance. scheme, optical and microwave beam riding on board and components, block diagram, transfer function. homing guidance. proportional navigation, modified proportional navigation, engagement kinematics, effect of seeker dynamics, seeker and homing heads-tracking, stabilisation and filtering. inertial navigation. basic concepts, stabilised platform, strapped down ins, error analysis. special control problems. inertial coupling (twd), high alpha coupling, canard control, moving wing control, structure control interaction 
overview of dynamical systems, estimation, control linear systems review state observers for linear systems linear output feedback control, pole placement  sensitivity, complementary sensitivity, robustness pedestrian overview of sde’s and ito calculus recursive recursive filtering; filtering; the kalman and wonham filters filters quantum filteringfeedback in frequency space: nyquist stability dynamic compensators and loop shaping open versus closed loop response; marginal stability application : tracking fcs balanced truncation; bio/quantum applications lyapunov stability; la salle's theorm. stable manifold and hartman-grobman theorems center mainfold theory. normal forms bifurcation phenomena. 
electromechanical energy conversion principle, singly excited magnetic system and doubly excited magnetic system. physical concept of torque production; electromagnetic torque and reluctance torque. concept of general terms pertaining to rotating machines: electrical & mechanical degree, pole pitch, coil, generated emf in full pitched coil, generated emf in a short pitched coil, emf polygon, distribution factor, pitch factor. mmf produced by distributed windings, mmf of a coil, mmf of single phase distributed winding, mmf waveform of commutator machines. dc machines: emf generated in the armature. methods of excitation, armature reaction & its effect in the performance, methods of decreasing the effects of armature reaction, effect of brush shift. commutation process, resistance commutation, delayed commutation, voltage commutation, improvement of commutation. operating characteristics of dc generators: separately excited generators, shunt generators, series generators and compound generators. torque equation of d.c motor, operating characteristics of shunt, series & compound motors. losses and efficiency of dc machines, hopkinson’s and swinburne’s test. d.c machine application: generator application, motor application 3-phase induction machine: induction motor as a transformer, flux and mmf phasors in induction motors, equivalent circuit, performance equations, induction motor phasor diagram toque-slip characteristic, power slip characteristic, determination of equivalent circuit parameters. methods of starting of squirrel cage and wound rotor motors. speed control of induction motor polarity test, application of polyphase induction motor. 3-phase transformer: determination of polarity and connections (star/star, star/delta, delta/star, star/zigzag, delta/zigzag, open delta), phasor groups. effect of unbalanced loading, production of harmonics in transformer and its suppression, 3 phase to 2 phase transformation, scott connection, 3 phase to 6 phase connections, double star and double delta, 3 winding transformer: parameter estimation, application, parallel operation of transformers, introduction to tap changing transformer and its function. special transformers: potential transformer, current transformer, pulse transformer, audio frequency transformer, grounding transformer, pulse transformer synchronous machines: introduction, voltage and torque equations in machine variables, voltage and torque equations in arbitrary reference frame variables, voltage and torque equations in rotor reference frame variables, torque equations in substitute variables, analysis of steady state operation, dynamic performance during a sudden change in input torque, linearized model, eigen values and small displacement stability, reduced order equations and dynamics. stepper motor: introduction, types, hybrid stepper motor- construction, principle of operation, two phases energized at a time, conditions for operation, different configurations, vr stepper motor- single stack and multi stack, drive systems and circuit for open loop and closed loop control of stepping motor. dynamic characteristics. single phase stepper motor, expression of voltage , current and torque for stepper motor and criteria for synchronization.  switched reluctance motor: constructional features, principle of operation, design aspects and profile of the srm, torque equation, power converters and rotor sensing mechanism, expression of torque and torque-speed characteristics, permanent magnet materials: permanent magnet materials, properties, minor hysteresis loop and recoil line, equivalent circuit, stator frames with permanent magnets, brushless dc motor : construction, operation, sensing and switching logic scheme, drive and power circuit, theoritical analysis and performance prediction, transient analysis. linear induction motor: construction and principle of operation of linear induction motor, approximate calculation of the force on rotor 
embedded system organization embedded computing – characteristics of embedded computing applications – embedded system design challenges; build process of realtime embedded system – selection of processor; memory; i/o devices-rs-485, modem, bus communication system using i2c, can, usb buses, 8 bit –isa, eisa bus; real-time operating system introduction to rtos; rtos- inter process communication, interrupt driven input and output - nonmaskable interrupt, software interrupt; thread – single, multithread concept; multitasking semaphores. interface with communication protocol design methodologies and tools – design flows – designing hardware and software interface . – system integration; spi, high speed data acquisition and interface-spi read/write protocol, rtc interfacing and programming; design of software for embedded control software abstraction using mealy-moore fsm controller, layered software development, basic concepts of developing device driver – sci – software - interfacing & porting using standard c & c++ ; functional and performance debugging with benchmarking real-time system software – survey on basics of contemporary rtos – vxworks, uc/os-ii case studies with embedded controller programmable interface with a/d & d/a interface; digital voltmeter, control- robot system; - pwm motor speed controller, serial communication interface. 
introduction to evolutionary computation (ec): biological and artificial evolution, different branches of ec, e.g., gas, ep, es,gp, etc. a simple evolutionary algorithm search operators: recombination/ crossover for strings (e.g. binary strings), e.g., one point, multipoint and uniform crossover operators, mutation for strings, e.g., bit flipping, recombination/crossover and mutation rates, recombination for real –valued representations, e.g. discrete and intermediate recombinations, mutation for real-valued representations, e.g., gaussian and cauchy mutations, self-adaptive mutations, etc. why and how a recombination or mutation operator works. selection schemes: fitness proportional selection and fitness scaling, ranking, including linear, power, exponential and other ranking methods, tournament selection, selection pressure and its impact on evolutionary search. search operators and representations: mixing different search operators, an anomaly of self-adaptive mutations, the importance of representation, e.g., binary vs. gray coding, adaptive representation, analysis, some examples multiobjective evolutionary optimization: pareto optimality, multiobjective evolutionary algorithms, computational time complexity of eas, no free lunch theorem some applications 
structure & components industrial automation systems. architectural levels of industrial controls. actuators & sensors: servomotors, stepper motors, process i/o systems. local & remote i/o systems. controllers: different types of controllers, single loop and multiloop controllers and their tunning, direct controllers and their tunning, direct controllers and their tunning, direct controllers and their tunning, direct controllers and their tunning, direct controllers and their tunning, direct controllers and their tunning, direct digital controllers, software implementation of multiloop controllers. distributed control systems. sequence control: programmable logic controllers, relay ladder logic, programming. supervisory controllers: functionally of supervisory control level, process optimization, recipe management material. tracking. man-machine interfaces. process operation management systems: overview of process operation management systems, order, inventory management, process scheduling, quality management. industrial communication systems: characteristic features of industrial networks. low level networks and their features, field bus architecture. performance aspects of industrial automation systems 
basics of energy conversion in drives: general expression of stored magnetic energy, concepts co energy and development of force/torque in single and doubly excited electro mechanical system, determination of air gap mmf and per phase machine inductance using physical machine data, voltage and torque equation of dc machine, three phase symmetrical induction machine and salient pole synchronous machines in phase variable form, switching and surge voltage transients in transformers. introduction to reference frame theory: static and rotating reference frames, transformation model relationships with static symmetrical three phase circuits, application of reference frame theory to three phase symmetrical alternating current machines.state space modelling. dynamic models: dynamic direct axis and quadrature axis model in arbitrarily rotating reference frames, voltage and torque equations, derivation of steady state phasor relationship from dynamic model, comparison of generalized theory of rotating electrical machine and kron’s primitive machine. determination of dynamic equivalent circuit parameters:standard and derived machine time constants, analysis and dynamic modelling of two phase asymmetrical induction machine and single phase induction machine, linearized and non-linearized analysis; operation on harmonic supplies, unbalanced operation of three-phase machine. permanent magnet synchronous machine: trapezoidal and sinusoidal back emf type, surface permanent magnet and interior permanent magnet machines, construction, operating principle and its characteristics, dynamic modeling and self controlled operation of bldc & pmsm. switch reluctance motors: analysis and design trade off, basic operating characteristics. different control topologies of srm 
machine learning review: statistics, linear algebra, optimization supervised techniques basic classification: decision trees, nearest neighbor application: tumor type prediction advanced classification: neural network, svm, ensemble cognitive state detection joint movement detection in microsoft kinect basic regression: linear regression, nonlinear regression application: vital sign monitoring probabilistic approach learning, inference logistic regression, bayesian network features feature selection: filter-based, embedded, wrapper bioinformatics, fmri data unsupervised techniques dimensionality reduction: linear, non-linear application: drug discovery cluster analysis: k-means, dbscan, hierarchical gene expression frequent itemset mining genome wide association (gwa) graph mining medical imaging time series processing preprocessing, similarity measures, motif discovery ecg, eeg, accelerometer data 
general features – construction and principle of operation of moving coil, moving iron, dynamometer, thermal and rectifier type deflecting instruments. deflecting, controlling and damping torques, extension of instrument ranges using shunts, multipliers and instrument transformers. measurement of low, medium and high resistances, kelvins double bridge, multimeters, megger, localization of cable faults. d.c. and a.c. potentiometers, measurement of high voltage, electrostatic instruments, measurement of inductances, capacitance and frequency by a.c. bridges. measurement of power in polyphase circuits, various wattmeter connections. a.c. and d.c. energy meters. c.r.o. construction & principle measurement of voltage, current, frequency and phase by oscilloscope. electronic voltmeters – analog and digital. digital multimeters, audio oscillators, signal generators and frequency counter.  
biomedical signals and images ecg: cardiac electrophysiology, relation of electrocardiogram (ecg) components to cardiac events, clinical applications. guest lecture. speech signals: the source-filter model of speech production, spectrographic analysis of speech. speech coding: analysis-synthesis systems, channel vocoders, linear prediction of speech, linear prediction vocoders. imaging modalities: survey of major modalities for medical imaging: ultrasound, x-ray, ct, mri, pet, and spect. mri: physics and signal processing for magnetic resonance imaging. guest lecture. surgical applications: a survey of surgical applications of medical image processing. guest lecture. fundamentals of deterministic signal and image processing data acquisition: sampling in time, aliasing, interpolation, and quantization. digital filtering: difference equations, fir and iir filters, basic properties of discrete-time systems, convolution. dtft: the discrete-time fourier transform and its properties. fir filter design using windows. dft: the discrete fourier transform and its properties, the fast fourier transform (fft), the overlap-save algorithm, digital filtering of continuous-time signals. sampling revisited: sampling and aliasing in time and frequency, spectral analysis. image processing i: extension of filtering and fourier methods to 2-d signals and systems. image processing ii: interpolation, noise reduction methods, edge detection, homomorphic filtering. probability and random signals pdfs: introduction to random variables and probability density functions (pdfs). classification: bayes' rule, detection, statistical classification. estimating pdfs: practical techniques for estimating pdfs from real data. random signals i: time averages, ensemble averages, autocorrelation functions, crosscorrelation functions. random signals ii: random signals and linear systems, power spectra, cross spectra, wiener filters. blind source separation: use of principal component analysis (pca) and independent component analysis (ica) for filtering. image segmentation and registration image segmentation: statistical classification, morphological operators, connected components. image registration i: rigid and non-rigid transformations, objective functions. image registration ii: joint entropy, optimization methods. 
basics of a microgrid : concept and definition of microgrid, microgrid drivers and benefits, review of sources of microgrids, typical structure and configuration of a microgrid, ac and dc microgrids, power electronics interfaces in dc and ac microgrids, control and operation of microgrid : modes of operation and control of microgrid: grid connected and islanded mode, active and reactive power control, protection issues, anti-islanding schemes: passive, active and communication based techniques, microgrid communication infrastructure, power quality issues in microgrids, regulatory standards, microgrid economics, introduction to smart microgrids. 
dynamics basic concepts: power system stability slates of operation and system security system dynamics problems system model analysis of steady state stability and transient stability, simplified representation of excitation control.  . modeling of synchronous machine: synchronous machine park's transformation -transformation of flux linkages, transformation of stator voltage equations and rotor equations. analysis of steady state performance, per unit quantities - equivalent circuits of synchronous machine determination of parameters of equivalent circuits. excitation system: excitation system modeling, excitation systems block diagram system representation by stale equation s. dynamics of a synchronous generator connected to infinite bus: system model synchronous machine model, stator equations rotor equations, synchronous machine model with field circuit and with field circuit and one equivalent damper winding on q axis (model 1.1), calculation oflnitial conditions. analysis of single machine system: small signal analysis with block diagram representation characteristic equation and application of routh hurwitz criterion synchronizing and damping torque analysis, small signal model state equations. application of power system stabilizers: basic concepts in applying pss, control signals, structure and tuning of pss, washout circuit, dynamic compensator analysis of single machine infinite bus system with and without pss. high voltage dx, transmission ha'.d.c. transmission: general considerations, power handling capabijities of hvdc lines, basic conversion principles, static converter configuration. static power converters: 3-pulse, 6-pu!se and 12-pulse converters, converter station and terminal equipment, commutation process, rectifier and inverter operation, equivalent circuit for converter -special features of converter transformers. harmonics in hvdc systems, harmonic elimination, ac and dc filters. control of hvdc converters and systems: constant current, constant extinction angle and constani ignition angle control- individual phase control and equidistant firing angle control, dc power flow control. interaction between mv ac and dc systems - voltage interaction, harmonic instability problems and dc power modulation. multi-terminal dc links and systems; series, paral lei and series parallel systems, their operation and control. transient over voltages in hvdc systems: over voltages due to disturbances on dc side, ovsr voltages due to dc and ac side line faults converter faults and protection in hvdc systems: converter faults, over current protection - valve group, and dc jine protection. over voltage protection of converters, surge arresters. energy conversion systems photo voltaic power generation .spectral distribution of energy in solar radiation, solar ceil configurations, voltage developed by solar cell, photo current and load current, practical sojar cell performance, commetetal photo voltaic systems, test specifications for pv systems, appiications of super conducting materials in electrical equipment systems. principles of mhd power generation, ideal mhd generator performance, practical mhd generator, mhd technology. wind energy conversion: power from wind, properties of air and wind, types of wind turbines, operating characteristics. tides and tidal power stations, modes of operation, tidal project examples, turbines and generators for tidal power generation. wave energy conversion; properties of waves and power conteiit, vertex motion of waves, device applications. types of ocean thennal energy conversion systems application of otec systems examples, miscellaneous energy conversion systems: coal gasification and liquefaction, biomass conversion, geothennal energy, thenno electric energy conversion, principles of emf generation, description of fuel cells co-generation and energy storage, combined cycle co-generation, energy storage. global energy position and environmental effects: energy units, global energy position.. types of fuel cells, hz-02 fuel cells, application of fuel cells - batteries, description of batteries, battery application for large power. environmental effects of energy conversion systems, pollution from coal and preventive measures steam stations and pollution, pollution free energy systems, microprocessors and microcontrollers 8086/8088 processors: introduction to 8086 microprocessors, architecture, addressing modes, instruction set, register organization, assembler directives. hard ware description; pindiagram signal description min and max modes, bus timing, ready and wait states, 8086 based micro computing system. special features and related programming:  stack structure of 80s6, memory segmentation, interrupts, isr, nmi, mi and interrupt programming, macros. advanced microprocessors:  intel 80386 programming model .memory paging,  introduction to £0486, introduction to pentium microprocessors and special pentium pro features. basic peripherals and their interfacing:-memory interfacing (dram) ppi- modes of operation of 8255 jnterfacing to adc and dac. special purpose of programmable peripheral devices and their interfacing :programmable interval :iraer, 8253 , pic b259a,display controller programmable communication interface s251.usart and exercises. microcontrollers : introduction to intel 8 bit and 16 bit microcontrollers, 8051- architecture, memory organization, addressing modes and exercises hardware description of 8051: instruction formats ,instruction sets, interrupt structure and interrupt priorities, port structures and operation linear counter functions different modes of operation and programming examples. high voltage engineering and insulation co-ordination conduction and breakdown in gases: lonization process. twonsend's current growth equation, current growth in the secondary processes, twonsend's  criterion  for breakdown,   streamer  theory  of breakdown   in   gases,   paschen  jaw, breakdown in nun unifonn fields and corona discharge. conduction, breakdown in liquids and solids: pure liquids and commercial liquids, conduction and breakdown in pure liquids, breakdown in solids dielectrics, intrinsic breakdown, electromechanical breakdown and ihennal breakdown. generation of high voltage and currents: generation of high d,c\ generation of high alternating voltages, generation of impulse voltages, generation of impulse currents, tripping and control of impulse generators measurement of high voltage and currents: measurement of high d,c. voltages, measurement of high a.c, and impulse voltages, measurement of high d,c. ax. and impulse currents. calhoae ray oscilloscope for impulse voltage and current measurements. testing of materials and apparatus measurement of d.c. resistivity,  measurement of dielectric  constant and  loss  factor;  partial discharge measurements, testing of insulators, bushing, circuits breakers, transformers and surge divertors. over voltage phenomenon insulation coordination: causes of over voltage, lighting phenomenon, switching ovtr voltages and power frequency over voltages in power systems, insulation coordination: principle of insulation coordination on high voltage and extra high voltage power systems. gas insulated substations: advantages of gas insulated substations, comparison of gas insulated substations and air insulated substations, design and layout of gas insulated substations, description of various components in gis. voltage stability introduction to voltage stability definitions: voltage stability" voltage collapse, voltage security; physical relation indicating dependency of voltage on reactive power flow; factors affecting voltage collapse and instability; previous cases of voltage collapse incidences. graphical analysis of voltage stability comparison of voltage and angular stability of the system; graphical methods describing voltage collapse phenomenon: p- v and q- v curves; detailed description of voltage collapse phenomenon with the help of q- v curves. analysis of voltage stability analysis of voltage stability on smlb system: analytical treatment and analysis. voltage stability indices voltage collapse proximity indicator; determinant of jacobin as proximity indicators; voltage liability margm. power system loads loads that influences voltage stability: discharge lights, induction motor, air-conditioning, heat pumps, electronic power supplies, oh lines and cables. reactive power compensation generation and absorption of reactive power;  series and shunt compensation;  synchronous condensers, svc ol tc s; booster transformers-unit - vii: voltage stability margin stabilty margin: compensated and'un-comensated systems. voltage security definition; voltage security; methods to improve voltage stability and its practical aspects. operation research linear programming problem:  formulation - graphical method - simplex method - artificial variable techniques - big-m tune -phase methods duality theorem - dual simplex method - sensitivity analysis - effect of changes in cost coefficients, constraint constants, addition/deletion of variables and constraints transportation problem - formulation - initial basic feasible solution methods - northwest, least cost and vogels methods, modi optimization - unbalanced and degeneracy treatment assignment problem - formulation - hungarian method - variants of assignment problems, sequencing problems - flow shop sequencing - n jobsx2 machines sequencing - n jobsx3 machines sequencing job-shop sequencing - 2 jobsxm machines sequencing - graphical methods game theory - introduction - terminology - saddle point games - with out saddle point games - 2x2 games, analytical method - 2\n and mx2 games - graphical method - dominance principle dynamic programming - bellman's principle of optimality - short route - capital investment - inventory allocation non linear optimization - single variable optimization problem - unimodal function - elimination methods - fibinocci and golden reaction methods - interpolation methods - quadratic and cubic interpolation method. multi variable optimization problem - direct research methods - univariam method pattern search methods - powell's, hook-jeaves and rosen-brock's search method. geometric programming - polynomial - arithmetic - seametric inequality - unconstrained g:p - constraint g.p with:s; type constraint. simulation: definition - types- steps- simulation of simple electrical systems - advantages and analysis of power electronic converters unit i single phase ac voltage controllers. single phase ac voltage controllers with resistive, resistive-inductive and resistive-inductive-induced e.m.f, loads - ac voltage controllers with pwm control - effects of source and load inductances _ synchronous tap changers applications - numerical problems. unit h three phase ac voltage controllers. three phase ac voltage controllers - analysis of controllers with star and delta    connected resistive, resistive-inductive loads - effects of source and load inductances - applications -numerical problems. h cycloconvertors. single phase to single phase eye 1 oconverters - analysis of midpoint and bridge configurations -three phase to three phase eye 1 oconverters - analysis of midpoint and bridge configurations -limitations - advantages - applications       - numerical problems. single phase converters. single phase converters - half controlled and fully controlled converters / evaluation of input power factor and harmonic factor - continuous and discontinuous load current - single phase dual converters - power factor improvements - extinction angle control- symmetrical angle controlpwm - single phase sinusoidal pwm - single phase series -converters applications - numerical problems. three phase converters. three phase converters - half controlled and fully controlled converters evaluation of input power factor and harmonic factor - continuous and    discontinuous load current - three phase dual converters - power factor improvements - three phase pwm - twelve pulse converters - applications numerical problems. d.c to d.c. converters-analysis of step-down and step-up dc to dc converters with resistive and resistive-inductive load^ -switched mode regulators - analysis of buck regulators - boost regulators - buck and boost regulators - cuk regulators condition for continuous inductor current and capacitor voltage -comparison of regulators -multioutput boost converters - advantages - applications numerical problems. pulse width modulated inverters(single phase). principle of operation - performance parameters - single phase bridge inverter voltage and current with resistive, inductive and capacitive loads - voltage control of single phase inverters - single pwm - multiple pwm - sinusoidal pwm - modified pwm - phase displacement evaluation of output control - advanced modulation techniques for improved performance trapezoidal, staircase, stepped, harmonic injection and delta modulation advantage - application - numerical problems. pulse width modulated inverters(three phase). three phase inverters - analysis of 180 degree condition for output voltage and current with resistive, inductive loads - analysis of 120 degree conduction - voltage control of three phase inverters - sinusoidal pwm third harmonic pwm - 60 degree pwm - space vector modulation -comparison of pwm techniques - harmonic reductions - current source inverter - variable d.c. link inverter - boost inverter - buck and boost inverter - inverter circuit design - advantages - applications - numerical problems. energy conversion systems photo voltaic power generation ,spectral distribution of energy in solar radiation, solar  cell configurations, voltage developed by solar cell, photo current and load current, practical solar cell performance, commercial photo voltaic systems,  test specifications for pv systems, applications of super conducting materials in electrical equipment systems. principles of mhd power generation, ideal mhd generator performance, practical mhd generator, mhd technology. wind energy conversion: power from wind, properties of air and wind, types of wind turbines, operating characteristics. tides and tidal power stations, modes of operation , tidal project examples, turbines and generators for  tidal power generation. wave energy conversion: properties of waves and power content, vertex motion of waves,   device applications. types of ocean thermal energy conversion systems application of otec systems examples, miscellaneous energy conversion systems: coal gasification and liquefaction, biomass conversion, geothermal energy, thermo electric energy conversion, principles of emf generation, description of fuel cells co-generation and energy storage, combined cycle co-generation, energy storage. global energy position and environmental effects: energy units, global energy  position.. types of fuel cells, h2-o2 fuel cells, application of fuel cells – batteries, description of batteries, battery application for large power. environmental effects of energy conversion systems, pollution from  coal and preventive measures steam stations and pollution, pollution free energy systems. reliability engineering elements of probability theory probability distributions : random variables, density and distribution functions. mathematical expectation. binominal distribution, poisson distribution, normal distribution, exponential distribution, weibull distribution.  definition of reliability. significance of the terms appearing in the definition. component reliability, hazard  rate, derivation of the reliability function in terms of the hazarad rate.  hazard  models. failures:  causes of failures, types of failures ( early failures, chance failures and wear-out failues). modes of failure.  bath tub curve. effect of preventive maintenance.  measures of reliability: mean time to failure and mean time between failures. reliability logic diagrams ( reliability block diagrams) classification of engineering systems:    series, parallel, series-parallel, parallel-series and non-series-parallel configurations. expressions for the reliability of the basic configurations. reliability evaluation of non-series-parallel configurations: minimal tie-set, minimal cut-set and decomposition methods. deduction of the minimal cutsets from the minimal pathsets. discrete markov chains:  general modelling concepts, stochastic transitional probability matrix, time dependent probability evaluation and limiting state probability evaluation.  absorbing states. continuous markov processes:  modelling concepts,  state space diagrams, stochastic transitional probability matrix,  evaluating limiting state probabilities.  reliability evaluation of repairable systems. series systems, parallel systems with two and more than two components, network reduction techniques.  minimal cutset/failure mode approach. energy auditing, conservation and management basic principles of energy audit energy audit- definitions, concept, types of audit, energy index, cost index ,pie charts, sankey diagrams, load profiles, energy conservation schemes- energy audit of industries- energy saving potential, energy audit of process industry, thermal power station, building energy audit energy management principles of energy management, organizing energy management program, initiating, planning, controlling, promoting, monitoring, reporting- energy manger, qualities and functions, language, questionnaire - check list for top management energy efficient  otors energy efficient motors, factors affecting efficiency, loss distribution, constructional details, characteristics - variable speed, variable duty cycle systems, rms hp- voltage van at ion-voltage unbalance- over motoring1-1 motor energy audit power factor improvement, lighting and energy instruments power factor - methods of improvement, location of capacitors, pf with non linear loads, effect of hannonics on p.f , p.f motor controllers - good lighting system design and practice, lighting control .lighting energy audit - energy instruments- watt meter, data loggers, thermocouples, pyrometers,tux meters, tongue testers ,application of plc's economic aspects and analysis economics analysis-depreciation methods, time value of money, rate of return, present worth method, replacement analysis, life cycle costing analysis- energy efficient motonj- calculation of simple payback method, net present worth method- power factor correction, lighting - applications of life cycle costing analysis, return on investment. reference books: energy management by w.k. murphy and g- mckay butier worth, heine mann publications. energy management by paulo1 callaghan, mc-graw hill book company-1 st edition, 1998 energy efficient electric motors by john .c. andreas, marcel dekkerlnc ltd-2nd edition, energy management hand book by w.c.turner, john wiley and sons energy management and good lighting practice: fuel efficiency- book let 12-eeo microprocessors and micro controllers lab list of experiments microprocessor 8086 introduction to masm / t asm arithmetic operations: multi byte addition, subtraction, multiplication and division, signed and unsigned arithmetic operation. asci i - arithmetic. logic operations: shift and rotate - converting packed bcd to unpacked bcd, bcd to ascii conversion. by using string operation and instruction prefix - move block, reverse string, sorting, inserting, deleting, length of string, string comparison. modular programming - procedure, near and far implementation, recursion. dosibios programming - reading key board (buffered with and without echo) - display characters, string. interfacing to 8086 8259 - interrupt controller 8279 - keyboard / display s255 -ppi 8251 -usart stepper motor traffic light control gp1b (ieee 488} interface numeric printer interface rtc interface aldandd/a dma interface fdc-eprom programmer interface microcontroller 8051 reading and writing on a parallel port timer in different modes serial communication implementation understanding three memory areas of oo-ff (programs using above areas) 5) ing external interrupts programs using special instructions like swap, bit/byte, set/ reset etc. program based on sort, page, absolute addressing. 
phase controlled rectifiers– single phase half wave controlled rectifier with r, r-l, r-l with freewheeling diodes.full wave controlled rectifier with various kind of loads. half controlled and full controlled bridges with passive and active loads-input line current harmonics and power factor-inverter mode of operation.three phase half wave controlled rectifier with r,r-l an r-l-e loads.thre phase semi and full converters with rl and rle loads.input side current harmonics and power factor. dual converterscirculating current mode and non circulating current mode. module-ii (12 hours) ac voltage regulators and dc choppers-types of ac voltage regulators-single phase full wave ac voltage controllers-single phase transformer tap changers-multistep transformer tap changer. three phase ac voltage regulators. output performance analysis of type a chopper, four quadrant chopper operation. module-iii (14 hours) switch-mode dc-ac inverters. basic concepts, single phase inverters,push pull, half bridge and full bridge square wave inverters, blanking time, single pulse modulation of single phase square wave inverters,multi pulse modulation-pwm principle, sinusoidal pwm in single phase inverters,choice of carrier frequency in spwm,spectral content in the output,unipolar and bipolar switching in spwm-maximum attainable dc voltage,switch utilization, reverse recovery problem and carrier frequency selection,output side filter requirements and filter design-ripple in the inverter outputdc side current,three phase inverters-three phase square wavestepped wave inverters.three phase spwm inverters,output filters,dc side current, effect of blanking time on inverter output voltage. 
switch realization: survey of power semiconductor devices, power diode, scr, gto, lascr, rct, sith, bjt, mosfet, igbt etc., switching losses, driver circuits, protection, cooling, application . controlled rectifiers (converters): single phase / three phase, half wave / full wave, half controlled /fully controlled converters with r, rl and rle loads, continuous and discontinuous current operations- evaluation of performance parameters. effects of source inductance- power factor improvement techniques - twelve pulse converters - dual converters. dc- dc converters: principle of operation of buck, boost, buck-boost, cuk, fly back, forward, push-pull, half bridge, full bridge converters with continuous and discontinuous operation, input & output filter design, multi-output boost converters, diode rectifier based boost converters. state space analysis of regulators. design: design considerations: snubber circuit, driver circuit, temperature control and heat sink, materials, windings. design of converter and chopper circuits. triggering circuits for converter and choppers. mmf equations, magnetic. design of transformers and inductors.  page of 7 18 converter dynamics / simulations: feed back control for converters: regulation and control problem, control principles, model for feedback, p and pi control. non linear dynamic modeling , control and analysis of choppers, voltage mode and current mode control. simulation: process, mechanics, techniques, pspice simulator. 8emi and power quality problems. power conditioning. pll / micro computer based converters and choppers inverters: single and three phase bridge inverters with r, rl and rle loads, voltage control, harmonic reduction, square wave inverters, pwm inverters, modulation techniques, spwm, selective harmonic elimination pwm and delta modulation. blanking time. harmonic spectrum and comparison among different pwm techniques. boost inverter. current source inverters, inverter circuit design . resonant pulse converters: series and parallel resonant inverters - zero current and zero voltage switching resonant converters, frequency response. two quadrant zero voltage switching resonant converters, resonant dc link inverters, design and analysis, soft switching, load dependent problem. multi level inverters: types, operations, features. cycloconverters: single phase and three phase cycloconverters with r, rl and rle loads – voltage control , harmonic analysis, operation waveforms designs. ac voltage controllers: single phase and three phase ac voltage controllers with r, rl and rle loads, voltage control, harmonic analysis, operation waveforms pwm, matrix converter, design.  page of 12 18 dynamics of above converters: modeling and control of inverters, resonant pulse converters, cyclo-converters, ac voltage controllers. application of microcomputer . design: method for control design: averaging method, small signal analysis, linearization, challenge. geometric control: hysteresis control, boundary control. triggering circuit. design of inverters, resonant pulse converters, cyclo-converters, ac voltage controllers circuits. pll / micro computer based inverters, cycloconverters, ac voltage controllers 
system load – variation, load characteristics – load curves and load-duration curves, load factor, diversity factor, load forecasting, simple techniques of forecasting, basics of power system operation and control, reserve margin, load-frequency control, voltage control. real power - frequency problem : speed governing mechanism and modelling, speed-load characteristics, load sharing, control area concept, lfc control of a single-area system, static and dynamic analysis, integration of economic dispatch control with lfc, two-area system – modelling – static analysis of uncontrolled case, tie line with frequency bias control of two-area system. reactive power – voltage control : reactive power control, excitation systems – modelling, static and dynamic analysis, stability compensation, generation and absorption of reactive power, relation between voltage, power and reactive power at a node, method of voltage control, tap changing transformers, tap setting of oltc transformer and mvar injection of switched capacitors. economic load dispatch : economic dispatch problem – cost of generation, incremental cost curve, co-ordination equations, solution by direct method and lambda- iteration method, unit commitment problem – constraints, solution methods – priority-list methods – forward dynamic programming approach (numerical problems only in priority-list method using full-load average production cost). computer control of power systems : need of computer control of power systems, concept of energy control center (or) load dispatch center and the functions, system monitoring, data acquisition and control, system hardware configuration, scada and ems functions, network topology, state estimation, security analysis and control, operating states. 
introduction to restructuring of power industry introduction : reasons for restructuring / deregulation of power industry understanding the restructuring process :  entities involved the levels of competition the market place mechanisms sector-wise major changes required introduction to issues involved in deregulation reasons and objectives of deregulation of various power systems across the world the us the uk the nordic pool the developing countries fundamentals of economics consumer behaviour total utility and marginal utility law of diminishing marginal utility consumer surplus consumer equilibrium market demand curve demand elasticity supplier behaviour law of diminishing marginal product supply functions supplier equilibrium supplier surplus supplier elasticity market equilibrium global welfare deadweight loss short-run and long-run costs various costs of production total cost (tc) average fixed cost (afc) average variable cost (avc) average cost (ac) marginal cost (mc) relationship between short-run and long-run average costs perfectly competitive market the firm's supply decision under perfect competition the philosophy of market models market models based on contractual arrangements monopoly model single buyer model wholesale competition model retail competition model comparison of various market models electricity vis-a-vis other commodities distinguishing features of electricity as a commodity four pillars of market design imbalance scheduling and dispatch congestion management ancillary services market architecture timeline for various energy markets bilateral / forward contracts the spot market discriminatory or non-discriminatory pricing? simple bids or complex bids day-ahead and real-time market models for trading arrangements integrated or centralized model decentralized model comparison between trading arrangement models iso or tso model transmission congestion management definition of congestion reasons for transfer capability limitation importance of congestion management in deregulated environment effects of congestion desired features of congestion management schemes classification of congestion management methods basis for classification non-market methods market methods calculation of atc definition of various terms atc ttc trm cbm atc calculation using ptdf and lodf based on dc model dc load flow model power transfer distribution factor (ptdf) calculation of ptdf using dc model atc calculation using ptdf line outage distribution factor (lodf) atc calculation using ptdf and lodf calculation of atc using ac model non-market methods capacity allocation on first come first served basis capacity allocation based on pro-rata methods capacity allocation based on type of contract market based methods explicit auctioning coordinated auctioning nodal pricing opf based congestion management dc opf opf with load elasticity ac opf interpretation of lagrange multipliers implications of nodal pricing inter-zonal intra-zonal congestion management price area congestion management algorithm illustrative example capacity alleviation method re-dispatching counter-trade curtailment comparison and conclusion locational marginal prices (lmp) and financial transmission rights (ftr) mathematical preliminaries convexity duality perturbation analysis sensitivity analysis kkt necessary conditions for optimality fundamentals of locational marginal pricing concept illustrative examples generic formulation lossless dcopf model for lmp calculation formulation lmp derivation reference node independency loss compensated dcopf model for lmp calculation formulation lmp derivation reference node independency accuracy comparison of both the models acopf model for lmp calculation introduction to financial transmission rights risk hedging functionality of financial transmission rights simultaneous feasibility test and revenue adequacy ftr issuance process ftr auction auction formulation auction pricing time differentiation of ftr products ftr allocation direct allocation auction revenue rights treatment of revenue shortfall secondary trading of ftrs flow gate rights ftr vs fgr ftr and market power ftr and merchant transmission investment summary ancillary service management introduction to ancillary services types of ancillary services classification of ancillary services load-generation balancing related services frequency regulation load following spinning reserve services voltage control and reactive power support services different sources of reactive power generators synchronous condensers capacitors and inductors svcs statcoms comparison between different sources of reactive power issues in reactive power management black start capability service how to obtain ancillary services? mandatory provision of ancillary services markets for ancillary services co-optimization of energy and reserve services international comparison england and wales nordic countries caiso nyiso loss of opportunity cost australia pricing of transmission network usage and loss allocation introduction to transmission pricing what is power wheeling? issues involved principles of transmission pricing classification of transmission pricing methods rolled-in transmission pricing methods postage stamp method incremental postage stamp method contract path method mw-mile method distance based power flow based power flow tracing proportionate sharing principle graph theoretic approach simultaneous equations approach equivalent bilateral exchange method z bus cost allocation method marginal transmission pricing paradigm short-run marginal cost pricing complementary charge long-run marginal cost pricing composite pricing paradigm two part tariff merits and de-merits of different paradigms debated issues in transmission pricing introduction to loss allocation why loss allocation is contentious? classification of loss allocation methods pro-rata methods incremental methods power flow tracing based allocation comparison between various methods market power and generators bidding attributes of a perfectly competitive market the firm's supply decision under perfect competition imperfect competition monopoly oligopoly cournot model bertrand model electricity markets under imperfect competition market power sources of market power effect of market power identifying market power hhi index entropy coefficient lerner index market power mitigation effects of contract for differences role of demand side bidding financial markets associated with electricity markets forwards futures options swaps introduction to optimal bidding by a generator company bidding in real markets optimal bidding methods game theory markov decision process genetic algorithm equilibrium analysis conjectural variation bayesian analysis us and european market evolution us markets historical developments market design philosophy uniform market pricing model zonal market pricing model the ercot market market structure bilateral market tcr market ancillary service market real time energy market ercot market design challenges congestion management revenue adequacy inappropriate price signals towards standard market design (smd) need for smd defining characteristics of smd locational marginal prices (lmp) multi-settlement system day-ahead energy market real-time market virtual bidding benefits of multi-settlement system transmission rights market ancillary service market bilateral contracts pjm market scheduling timeline day-ahead energy market real-time market overview of real time lmp calculation description of lmp model lmp calculation settlements pjm market milestones the nordic power market earlier scenario transition towards unified nordic power market various markets in nordic pool the market activity time-line interaction between market and system operators the nordic spot market determination of system price the price area congestion management technique the balancing market system operational issues the real time market the imbalance settlements the congestion management in real time point-of-connection transmission tariff financial markets contract-for-difference (cfd) comparison of power markets reforms in indian power sector framework of indian power sector historical developments the institutional framework operational demarcation of the power system national and transnational grids reform initiatives during 1990-1995 the independent power plants orissa reform model accelerated power development and reforms program (apdrp) public-private partnership other developments the availability based tariff (abt) why was abt necessary? the mechanism working of the mechanism effects of abt intra-state abt the electricity act 2003 provisions in the generation sector provisions in the transmission sector provisions in the distribution sector power trading other important changes open access issues operational practices transmission pricing loss allocation reservation of transmission capacity and congestion management reactive power support explanation of practices using illustrative example power exchange : the auction. the congestion management. administration of physical delivery. timeline of activities. reforms in near future : 
introduction to power system stability power system operation and control. stability problems faced by power systems. impact on power system operation and control. analysis of  dynamical systems concept of equilibria, small and large disturbance stability. example: single machine infinite bus system. modal analysis of linear systems. analysis using numerical integration techniques. issues in modeling: slow and fast transients, stiff systems. modeling of a synchronous machine physical characteristics. rotor position dependent model. d-q transformation. model with standard parameters. steady state analysis of synchronous machine. short circuit transient analysis of a synchronous machine. synchronous machine connected to infinite bus. modeling of excitation and prime mover systems physical characteristics and models. control system components. excitation system controllers. prime mover control systems. modeling of transmission lines and loads transmission line physical characteristics. transmission line modeling. load models - induction machine model. other subsystems - hvdc, protection systems. stability issues in interconnected power systems single machine infinite bus system. multi-machine systems. stability of relative motion. frequency stability: centre of inertia motion. concept of load sharing: governors. single machine load bus system: voltage stability. torsional oscillations. power system stability analysis tools transient stability program. small signal analysis program. emtp programs. real-time simulators. enhancing system stability planning measures. stabilizing controllers (power system stabilizers). operational measures- preventive control. emergency control. 
statistics on conventional energy sources and supply in developing countries: definition, concepts of nces, limitations of res, criteria for assessing the potential of nces, classification of nces, solar, wind, geothermal, biomass, ocean energy sources, comparison of these energy sources. solar energy: definition, energy available from sun, solar radiation data, solar energy conversion into heat, flat plate and concentrating collectors, principle of natural and forced convection, solar engines: stirling, brayton engines, photo voltaics: p-n junctions. solar cells, pv systems, standalone, grid connected solar power satellite, calculation of energy through photovoltaic power generation. wind energy: energy available from wind, general formula, lift and drag. basis of wind energy conversion, effect of density, frequency variances, angle of attack, wind speed, windmill rotors, horizontal axis and vertical axis rotors, determination of torque coefficient, induction type generators, working principle of wind power plant.nature of geothermal sources: definition and classification of resources, utilization for electricity generation and direct heating, wellhead power generating units. basic features: atmospheric exhaust and condensing, exhaust types of conventional steam turbines. pyrolysis of biomass to produce solid, liquid and gaseous fuels. biomass asification, constructional details of gasifier, usage of biogas for chullas, various types of chullas for rural energy needs.wave, tidal and otec energy, difference between tidal and wave power generation. principles of tidal and wave power generation, otec power plants, operation of small open-cycle experimental facility, design of 5 mw otec pro-commercial plant. economics of otec, environmental impacts of otec, status of multiple product otec systems. 
analytical redundancy concepts : types of faults and different tasks of fault diagnosis and implementation - different approaches to fdd: model free and model based approaches-introductionmathematical representation of faults and disturbances: additive and multiplicative types – residual generation: detection, isolation, computational and stability properties – design of residual generator – residual specification and implementation design of structured residuals & directional structured residuals : residual structure of single fault isolation: structural and canonical structures- residual structure of multiple fault isolation: diagonal and full row canonical concepts – introduction to parity equation implementation and alternative representation - directional specifications: directional specification with and without disturbances – parity equation implementation fault diagnosis using state estimators : state observer – state estimators – norms based residual evaluation and threshold computation - statistical methods based residual evaluation and threshold settings: generalized likelihood ratio approach – marginalized likelihood ratio approach. passive fault-tolerant control- active fault tolerant control - actuator and sensor fault tolerance principles:- compensation for actuator – sensor fault-tolerant control design – fault-tolerant control architecture - fault-tolerant control design against major actuator failures. fault tolerant control of three-tank system – diagnosis and fault-tolerant control of chemical process – supervision of steam generator – different types of faults in control valves – automatic detection, quantification and compensation of valve stiction. 
principles of sensing : data acquisition – sensor characteristics – electric charges, fields, potentials – capacitance – magnetism – inductance – resistance – piezoelectric – pyroelectric – hall effect – thermoelectric effects – sound waves – heat transfer – light – dynamic models of sensors optical components and interface electronics : radiometry – photometry – mirrors – lenses – fibre optics – concentrators – interface circuits  – amplifiers – lighttovoltage – excitation circuits – adc – digitization – capacitancetovoltage – bridge circuits – data transmission – noise in sensors and circuits – calibration – low power sensors motion related sensors : occupancy and motion detectors: ultrasonic – microwave – capacitive detectors – triboelectric – optoelectronic motion sensors – optical presence sensor – pressure gradient sensors velocity and  acceleration  sensors: accelerometer characteristics – capacitative  accelerometers – piezoelectric  accelerometers –  piezoresistive  accelerometers – thermal accelerometers – gyroscopes – piezoelectric cables – gravitational sensors light and radiation detectors : light detectors: photo diodes – photo transistor – photo resistor – cooled detectors – ccd and cmos image sensors – thermal detectors – optical design – gas flame detectors radiation detectors: scintillating detectors – ionization detectors – cloud and bubble chambers 
dc-dc converters without galvanic isolation - linear power supplies - overview of switching power supplies - introduction to dc - dc switched mode converters - step down converters - continuous conduction mode - boundary between continuous and discontinuous conduction - discontinuous conduction mode - output voltage ripple - step up converter - continuous conduction mode - boundary between continuous and discontinuous conduction - discontinuous conduction mode - buck boost converter - continuous conduction mode - boundary between continuous and discontinuous conduction - discontinuous conduction mode - output voltage ripple - cuk dc-dc converter - full bridge dc-dc converter - pwm with bipolar and unipolar voltage switching - dc-dc converter comparison. switching dc power supplies with isolation - dc-dc converters with electrical isolation - flyback converters - double ended flyback converter - forward converters - double ended forward converter - push pull converters - half bridge converters - full bridge converters voltage mode control of smps - loop gain and stability considerations - shaping the error amp frequency response - error amp transfer function - transconductance error amps - study of popular pwm control ics (sg 3525,tl 494,mc34060 etc.) current mode control of smps - current mode control advantages - current mode vs voltage mode - current mode deficiencies - slope compensation - study of a typical current mode pwm control ic uc3842. switch mode dc-ac converters - basic concepts of switch mode converters - pwm switching scheme - square wave switching scheme - single phase inverters - half bridge and full bridge inverters - spwm with bipolar and unipolar voltage switching - push pull inverters - switch utilization in single phase inverters - three phase inverters - spwm in three phase voltage source inverters - square wave operation - switch utilisation - ripple in the inverter output - conduction of switches in three phase inverters - effect of blanking time on voltage in pwm inverters - square wave pulse switching - programmed harmonic elimination switching - current regulated modulation - single phase switched mode rectifier and its control single phase utility interface - input current harmonic considerations - single phase boost type active power factor correction stage - basic operation - waveforms - current control strategies - output voltage control - power limits - power circuit design considerations - study of popular pfc control ics mc34062 and uc 3854. introduction to modeling of switched mode power supplies - state space averaging - state space averaged models - equivalent circuits and small signal transfer functions for basic converters. introduction to resonant converters - classification of resonant converters - basic resonant circuit concepts - load resonant converter - resonant switch converter - zero voltage switching clamped voltage topologies - resonant dc link inverters with zero voltage switching - high frequency link integral half cycle converter. 
advanced transistor models (subthreshold, continuous), second-order effects. noise models and distortion. simulator limits. integrated capacitors and resistors. differential signaling, (folded, regulated) cascode and follower associated concepts. the miller effect. pole-splitting. high-resistance node analysis, gain-bandwidth product, phase margin. basic stages, advanced current mirrors and references.  general model. simple ota. pole-zero doublet.  linearization techniques. fully differential amplifiers (fda). common-mode feedback issues. output stages. rail-to-rail input and output. current and voltage comparators. hysteresis. charge pumps.dlls. time-to-digital converters. digitally-assisted analog circuits. high-level simulation. analog and mixed-signal (ams) modeling. digital synthesis. digital back-end. analog and mixed-signal layout techniques. design rules. pvt issues. matching techniques. noise and crosstalk reduction. power-supply and clock considerations. pad characteristics and models. pad and power rings. package 
history: early wind power, technical development, influence of society and science winds: physical background, energy content, variation in time and in space, geographical resource distribution, influence of terrain, measurement methods, statistical analysis turbines: free flow, principles of drag and lift, aerodynamics, design of turbine blades, horizontal and vertical axis wind turbines, betz' and glauert's turbine theories, the bem method mechanics: static and dynamic loads (oscillations), rotor dynamics, solid mechanics, mechanical modelling, aeroelasticity electric generation: synchronous/ asynchronous generators, winding/ permanent magnetized generators, constant/ variable speed, transformers, power electronics, power converters design: horizontal and vertical axis wind turbines, blades, control mechanisms, drive train, tower, nacelle, foundation, choice of materials, manufacture, adaptation to different climates control: control targets, system modelling, control strategies (pitch and stall regulation), hardware systems: wind power parks, transports, erection, grid connection, operation, maintenance economy: financing, investment, costs during the life time of a wind turbine, value of wind energy, business and market overview society: environmental issues, law, forms of government support, technical aspects of environment small scale wind power: technology, economy, paths of development. 
