Review of Microelectronics and Introduction to MOS Technologies:
MOS, CMOS, BiCMOS Technology.
Basic Electrical Properties of MOS, CMOS & BiCMOS Circuits: Ids – Vds relationships, Threshold
Voltage VT, Gm, Gds and wo, Pass Transistor, MOS, CMOS & Bi CMOS Inverters, Zpu/Zpd, MOS
Transistor circuit model, Latch-up in CMOS circuits.
Layout Design and Tools:
Transistor structures, Wires and Vias, Scalable Design rules, Layout Design tools.
Logic Gates & Layouts:
Static Complementary Gates, Switch Logic, Alternative Gate circuits, Low power gates, Resistive and
Inductive interconnect delays.
Combinational Logic Networks:
Layouts, Simulation, Network delay, Interconnect design, Power optimization, Switch logic networks,
Gate and Network testing.
Sequential Systems:
Memory cells and Arrays, Clocking disciplines, Design, Power optimization, Design validation and
testing.
Floor planning methods, Global Interconnect, Floor Plan Design, Off-chip connections
Introduction to Embedded Systems
Definition of Embedded System, Embedded Systems Vs General Computing Systems, History of
Embedded Systems, Classification, Major Application Areas, Purpose of Embedded Systems,
Characteristics and Quality Attributes of Embedded Systems.
Core of the Embedded System: General Purpose and Domain Specific Processors, ASICs, PLDs,
Commercial Off-The-Shelf Components (COTS), Memory: ROM, RAM, Memory according to the
type of Interface, Memory Shadowing, Memory selection for Embedded Systems, Sensors and
Actuators, Communication Interface: Onboard and External Communication Interfaces.
Embedded Firmware:
Reset Circuit, Brown-out Protection Circuit, Oscillator Unit, Real Time Clock, Watchdog Timer,
Embedded Firmware Design Approaches and Development Languages.
RTOS Based Embedded System Design:
Operating System Basics, Types of Operating Systems, Tasks, Process and Threads,
Multiprocessing and Multitasking, Task Scheduling.
Task Communication: Shared Memory, Message Passing, Remote Procedure Call and Sockets,
Task Synchronization: Task Communication/Synchronization Issues, Task Synchronization
Techniques, Device Drivers, How to Choose an RTOS