CONTROL SYSTEM MODELING : Basic Elements of Control System – Open loop and Closed loop systems – Differential equation – Transfer function, Modeling of Electric systems, Translational and rotational mechanical systems – Block diagram reduction Techniques – Signal flow graph.
TIME RESPONSE ANALYSIS : Time response analysis – First Order Systems – Impulse and Step Response analysis of second order systems – Steady state errors – P, PI, PD and PID Compensation, Analysis using MATLAB
FREQUENCY RESPONSE ANALYSIS : Frequency Response – Bode Plot, Polar Plot, Nyquist Plot – Frequency Domain specifications from the plots – Constant M and N Circles – Nichol’s Chart – Use of Nichol’s Chart in Control System Analysis. Series, Parallel, series-parallel Compensators – Lead, Lag, and Lead Lag Compensators, Analysis using MATLAB.
STABILITY ANALYSIS : Stability, Routh-Hurwitz Criterion, Root Locus Technique, Construction of Root Locus, Stability, Dominant Poles, Application of Root Locus Diagram – Nyquist Stability Criterion – Relative Stability, Analysis using MATLAB
STATE VARIABLE ANALYSIS & DIGITAL CONTROL SYSTEMS : State space representation of Continuous Time systems – State equations – Transfer function  from  State  Variable  Representation  –  Solutions  of  the  state  equations  – Concepts of Controllability and Observability – State space representation  for Discrete time systems. Sampled Data control systems – Sampling Theorem – Sample & Hold – Open loop & Closed loop sampled data systems.
Review of Modeling and Analysis of LTI Systems:
Modeling of physical Systems. Design specifications and performance indices, Motion control systems,
Transportation lags. Approximation of time-delay functions., Sensitivity of control systems to parameter variations. Effects of
disturbance of signals. Disturbance rejection.
Analysis in state-space:
A perspective on state-space design. State variables. State models for physical systems. SISO and MIMO systems. Solution of
state equations. Transfer function. Eigenvalues and eigenvectors. Jacobian linearization technique. State transformations and
diagonalisation. Transformation to phase-variable canonical form. Controllability and observability. Duality property. Stability.
Introduction to Discrete-time Systems:
Basic elements of discrete-time control system. Z-transform and properties. Inverse Z-transform. Difference equation and its
solution by Z-transform method. Z-transfer function. State diagram of digital systems. Time delay. Direct, cascade and parallel
decomposition of Z-transfer functions.
Feedback control design:
Continuous control design. Proportional, derivative and integral control action. PID controller tuning rules. Ziegler-Nichols
method. Two degree of freedom control systems.
Compensator design using Bode diagram in frequency response approach. Lag, Lead, Lag-lead compensator.
Control law design for full state feedback by pole placement. Full order observer system. Observer based state feedback.
Separation principal.
Non linear system:
Classification and types of non-linearity. Phenomena peculiar to non-linear systems. Methods of analysis. Linearization based
on Taylor’s series expansion. Jacobian Linearization.
Phase trajectory and its construction. Phase-plane analysis of linear and non-linear sustems. Existence of limit cycles.
Describing function of typical non-linearities. Stability analysis by DF method. Introduction to DIDF. Popov’s circle criterion.
Stability analysis by Lyapunov’s indirect and direct methods, Lypunov’s theorem