Modelling and Simulation of Dynamic Systems
State variable Modelling of Continuous Dynamic Systems. Solution methods for
Nonlinear Differential equations. Bond Graph Techniques. Simulation Software. Skeletal
Structure of Simulation software. Packages and Scripting Techniques. Real-time
simulation systems. Case studies. Qualitative Modelling.
Control System Engineering
Review of classical control theory: Stability margins, correlation of frequency domain and
time domain parameters, design specifications, compensation of continuous systems,
actuator selection and design.
State variable modelling of linear continuous systems, controllability and observability.
Concepts of linear sampled data systems: Discrete equivalents of continuous data systems,
reconstruction of sampled signals, sample and 0 order holds, stability of linear sampled
data systems.
State variable modelling of linear discrete data systems, controllability and observability.
Digital Control Theory
Structure of a computer controlled system. Review of Z-transform. Computation of time
response of Discrete Data system. Bilinear Transformation. W-plane, prewarping, inverse
transformation. Design of discrete controllers. Z-domain compensation, w-plane
compensation, state variable feed back, deadbeat controller sampled data version of PID
controllers. Effect of Data Digitization. Effect of finite word size, limit cycle
determination.
Rockets and Missiles
Classification of Rockets & Missiles, components, subsystems and layout, launching
techniques, variation of air density with altitude, Indian Standard atmosphere.
Motion of Rockets – external ballistics and powered motion:
Equations of motion in point mass mode, static stability, motion about the CG, special
case like exo-atmospheric, vertical ascent motion, tip-off, reentry.
Elementary Missile Guidance Principles:
2
Guidance schemes, command guidance, proportional navigation, inertial sensors and
auxiliaries, concept of quaternion, strapped down inertial navigation.
Aerodynamics of Subsonic and supersonic vehicles:
Drag coefficients, lift coefficients, wake and down wash effects, design consideration.
The airframe – structural, functional and aerodynamic aspects:
Control schemes: Aerodynamic, thrust vectoring, actuation systems.
Propulsion systems:
General considerations, thrust-time characteristics, ISP, solid propulsion systems
(construction and subsystems, propellant types, composition and characteristics), liquid
propulsion system (Construction and subsystems, propellant types, composition and
characteristics, cryogenic propulsion systems), RamJet concepts, Nozzle design
consideration.
Computer Control of Industrial Processes
Introduction to computer Control: Brief History, Advantages, different types and
application areas, Direct Digital Control and Supervisory Control, SCADA, Embedded
Controller.
Example Processes: Standard SISO process, first order with delay Standard sensors and
actuators. Simple MIMO process. Batch process, which require sequential control.
Architecture of a Computer Control System: Generic architecture. Use of Context diagram
and DFD for architectural description. Specific Examples
Interfacing : Digital data transfer from peripherals, polling, interrupt, DMA. Interfacing
considerations for field Input-output.
Programmable Logic Controllers: Features functionalities and Architecture, Examples of
programming and applications
DDC controllers: Features functionalities and Architecture, Examples. DDC algorithms.
Digital Implementation of Two term (PI, PD) and three term (PID) controller.
Implementation of digital compensators. Model Based Control and their digital
implementations.
Distributed Control: Architecture, advantages. Communication for distributed control.
Field Bus.
Optimal and Robust Control
Optimal Control Systems and Performance Indices. Optimal Control of linear systems
with Quadratic Performance Index. Optimal State Regulator Design through Matrix Ricatti
equation. Properties and Application of the Optimal Regulator. Linear Quadratic Gaussian
(LQG) Control. State Estimator Design. System Design using State Estimators. Loop
Transfer Recovery (LTR). Frequency Shaping. Robust Control Systems and System
sensitivity. Uncertainty and Robustness. Structured and Unstructured uncertainty. Internal
Stability. Kharitnov's methodology. Stability robustness and Performance robustness of
Control Systems. Mu-Synthesis. Robust Tracking. H2 and H-infinity Control. H-Infinity
Loop Shaping. Gap Metric. Linear Matrix Inequalities (LMI). Quantitative Feedback
Theory (QFT).
Nonlinear and Adaptive Control
Nonlinear Control
State-space representation of non-linear systems, Common nonlinearities and their origin,
Examples of phase plane analysis for relay based control, Popov’s stability criterion, Local
linearization, Jacobian and Lyapunov’s first theorem, Stability analysis by Lyapunov
theory, Describing function method and Limit cycle, Feedback linearization, Sliding Mode
Control, Concepts of observability for non-linear systems
Adaptive Control
Linear parametric model, Adaptive laws, Model reference adaptive control, Robustness in
adaptive control, Adaptive control of nonlinear systems, Gain scheduling control
Real Time Systems
Overview of Real time systems.
Definition, evolution, typology, structure and applications.
Temporal Modelling and specification of real time systems.
State diagram, finite automata model, petri-net, state chart and mode chart, Q-model,
formal methods.
Sequential and logic control.
Ladder diagram, PLC programming, case studies in interlocking and sequence control.
Hardware Components and Configuration of real time system.
Interfacing systems for analog and digital I/O, programmable logic control system
architecture, computer control system architecture, flight control systems, hardware-inloop
simulation systems, distributed control architecture, reliability enhancement by
redundancy.
Real time Operating systems.
Features, primary components.
Structured design of real time systems.
Data flow oriented method of analysis and design. Mode chart oriented methods.
Development, integration and validation of real time systems.
Special consideration for safety critical systems.
Control and Guidance
Handling Criteria of Piloted Aircraft.
Motion of a Missile in 6 DOF.
Euler angle and quaternion. Six DOF equation of motion, structure of 6 DOF
simulation.
Roll autopilot for missiles
Equation of motion, transfer function, objective and structure.
Lateral stabilisation of missiles.
Equation of motion, transfer functions, structure and design of lateral missile
autopilots.
Pitch plane control of aircraft.
Objectives, structure of stability augmentation systems, pitch demand, q-demand,
n-demand and alpha demand FCS control systems.
Lateral control of bank to turn vehicles.
Goals and structure of lateral FCS, coordinated turn, roll lateral coupling, cross
feed.
Command guidance.
Scheme, optical and microwave beam riding on board and components, block
diagram, transfer function.
Homing guidance.
Proportional navigation, modified proportional navigation, engagement
kinematics, effect of seeker dynamics, seeker and homing heads-tracking,
stabilisation and filtering.
Inertial navigation.
Basic concepts, stabilised platform, strapped down INS, error analysis.
Special control problems.
Inertial coupling (TWD), high alpha coupling, canard control, moving wing
control, structure control interaction