Electromechanical Energy Conversion Principle, Singly Excited Magnetic
System and Doubly Excited Magnetic system. Physical concept of torque
production; Electromagnetic torque and Reluctance torque.
Concept of General terms pertaining to Rotating Machines: Electrical &
Mechanical degree, Pole pitch, Coil, Generated EMF in full pitched coil,
Generated EMF in a short pitched coil, EMF polygon,
Distribution factor, Pitch factor. MMF produced by Distributed Windings, MMF
of a coil, MMF of single phase distributed Winding, MMF waveform of
Commutator machines.
DC Machines:
EMF generated in the armature. Methods of Excitation, Armature reaction & its
effect in the performance, Methods of decreasing the effects of Armature
reaction, Effect of Brush shift.
Commutation process, Resistance commutation, Delayed commutation, Voltage
commutation, Improvement of Commutation.
Operating Characteristics of DC Generators: Separately Excited generators,
Shunt Generators, Series Generators and Compound Generators.
Torque equation of D.C motor, Operating Characteristics of Shunt, Series &
Compound motors.
Losses and efficiency of DC machines, Hopkinson’s and Swinburne’s test.
D.C Machine application: Generator application, Motor application
3-Phase Induction machine:
Induction motor as a Transformer, Flux and MMF phasors in Induction motors,
Equivalent circuit, Performance equations, Induction motor phasor diagram
Toque-slip characteristic, Power slip characteristic, Determination of equivalent
circuit parameters.
Methods of starting of squirrel Cage and Wound rotor Motors.
Speed control of Induction motor
Polarity Test, Application of Polyphase Induction motor.
3-Phase Transformer:
Determination of polarity and connections (star/star, star/delta, delta/star,
star/zigzag, delta/zigzag, open delta), Phasor groups.
Effect of unbalanced loading, Production of Harmonics in Transformer and its
suppression,
3 phase to 2 phase transformation, Scott connection, 3 phase to 6 phase
connections, Double star and Double delta,
3 winding transformer: Parameter estimation, application,
Parallel operation of Transformers, Introduction to Tap changing transformer and
its function.
Special Transformers: Potential transformer, Current transformer, Pulse
transformer, Audio frequency transformer, Grounding transformer, Pulse
transformer
Synchronous Machines: Introduction, Voltage and torque equations in machine variables, Voltage and Torque Equations in
Arbitrary reference Frame Variables, Voltage and Torque Equations in Rotor Reference Frame Variables, Torque Equations in
Substitute variables, Analysis of steady state operation, Dynamic Performance during a sudden change in Input torque,
Linearized model, Eigen values and small displacement stability, Reduced order equations and dynamics.
Stepper Motor: Introduction, Types, Hybrid stepper motor- construction, principle of operation, two phases energized at a time,
conditions for operation, different configurations, VR Stepper motor- single stack and multi stack, Drive systems and circuit for
open loop and Closed loop control of stepping motor. Dynamic characteristics. Single phase stepper Motor, Expression of
voltage , current and torque for stepper motor and criteria for synchronization.
 Switched Reluctance Motor: Constructional features, principle of operation, Design Aspects and profile of the SRM, Torque
equation, Power converters and rotor sensing mechanism, expression of torque and torque-speed characteristics,
Permanent Magnet Materials: Permanent magnet materials, properties, minor hysteresis loop and recoil line, equivalent
circuit, stator frames with permanent magnets,
Brushless DC Motor : Construction, operation, sensing and switching logic scheme, Drive and power circuit, Theoritical
analysis and performance prediction, transient Analysis.
Linear Induction Motor: Construction and principle of operation of Linear Induction Motor, Approximate calculation of the
force on rotor