Biomedical Signals and Images
ECG: Cardiac electrophysiology, relation of electrocardiogram (ECG) components to cardiac events, clinical applications. Guest lecture.
Speech Signals: The source-filter model of speech production, spectrographic analysis of speech.
Speech Coding: Analysis-synthesis systems, channel vocoders, linear prediction of speech, linear prediction vocoders.
Imaging Modalities: Survey of major modalities for medical imaging: ultrasound, X-ray, CT, MRI, PET, and SPECT.
MRI: Physics and signal processing for magnetic resonance imaging. Guest lecture.
Surgical Applications: A survey of surgical applications of medical image processing. Guest lecture.
Fundamentals of Deterministic Signal and Image Processing
Data Acquisition: Sampling in time, aliasing, interpolation, and quantization.
Digital Filtering: Difference equations, FIR and IIR filters, basic properties of discrete-time systems, convolution.
DTFT: The discrete-time Fourier transform and its properties. FIR filter design using windows.
DFT: The discrete Fourier transform and its properties, the fast Fourier transform (FFT), the overlap-save algorithm, digital filtering of continuous-time signals.
Sampling Revisited: Sampling and aliasing in time and frequency, spectral analysis.
Image processing I: Extension of filtering and Fourier methods to 2-D signals and systems.
Image processing II: Interpolation, noise reduction methods, edge detection, homomorphic filtering.
Probability and Random Signals
PDFs: Introduction to random variables and probability density functions (PDFs).
Classification: Bayes' rule, detection, statistical classification.
Estimating PDFs: Practical techniques for estimating PDFs from real data.
Random signals I: Time averages, ensemble averages, autocorrelation functions, crosscorrelation functions.
Random signals II: Random signals and linear systems, power spectra, cross spectra, Wiener filters.
Blind source separation: Use of principal component analysis (PCA) and independent component analysis (ICA) for filtering.
Image Segmentation and Registration
Image Segmentation: statistical classification, morphological operators, connected components.
Image Registration I: Rigid and non-rigid transformations, objective functions.
Image Registration II: Joint entropy, optimization methods.