Switch Realization: Survey of power semiconductor devices, Power diode, SCR, GTO, LASCR, RCT, SITH, BJT, MOSFET,
IGBT etc., Switching losses, driver circuits, protection, cooling, application .
Controlled Rectifiers (Converters): Single Phase / Three Phase, Half wave / full wave, half controlled /fully controlled
converters with R, RL and RLE loads, Continuous and discontinuous current operations- Evaluation of performance parameters.
Effects of source inductance- Power factor improvement techniques - twelve pulse converters - Dual converters.
DC- DC Converters: principle of operation of buck, boost, buck-boost, Cuk, fly back, forward, push-pull, half bridge, full
bridge Converters with continuous and discontinuous operation, Input & output filter design, multi-output boost converters,
diode rectifier based boost converters. State space analysis of regulators.
Design: Design considerations: snubber circuit, driver circuit, temperature control and heat sink, materials, windings. Design of
converter and chopper circuits. Triggering circuits for converter and choppers. MMF equations, magnetic. Design of
transformers and inductors. 
Page of 7 18
Converter Dynamics / simulations: Feed back control for converters: regulation and control problem, control principles, model
for feedback, P and PI control. Non linear dynamic modeling , Control and analysis of choppers, voltage mode and current
mode control. Simulation: process, mechanics, techniques, PSPICE simulator.
8EMI and Power Quality Problems. Power conditioning. PLL / Micro computer based converters and choppers
Inverters: Single and three phase bridge inverters with R, RL and RLE loads, Voltage control, Harmonic reduction, square
wave inverters, PWM inverters, modulation techniques, SPWM, Selective Harmonic Elimination PWM and delta modulation.
blanking time. harmonic spectrum
and comparison among different PWM techniques. Boost inverter. Current source inverters, Inverter Circuit Design .
Resonant Pulse Converters: Series and parallel resonant inverters - zero current and Zero voltage switching resonant
converters, frequency response. Two quadrant zero voltage switching resonant converters, Resonant dc link inverters, design and
analysis, soft switching, load dependent problem.
Multi level inverters: types, operations, features.
Cycloconverters: Single phase and three phase cycloconverters with R, RL and RLE loads – Voltage control , Harmonic
analysis, operation waveforms designs.
AC voltage controllers: Single phase and three phase ac voltage controllers with R, RL and RLE loads, Voltage control,
Harmonic analysis, operation waveforms PWM, Matrix converter, design. 
Page of 12 18
Dynamics of above converters: Modeling and control of inverters, resonant pulse converters, cyclo-converters, ac voltage
controllers. Application of microcomputer .
Design: Method for control design: averaging method, small signal analysis, linearization, challenge. Geometric control:
hysteresis control, boundary control. Triggering circuit. Design of inverters, resonant pulse converters, cyclo-converters, ac
voltage controllers circuits. PLL / Micro computer based inverters, cycloconverters, AC voltage controllers